---
chapter: 2
lesson: 4
title: Coalescent Simulation
summary: 
notebook: 
---

# Coalescent Simulations

## Under Construction


## Learning objectives
- Overview of coalescent simulation
- Using msprime to perform coalescent simulations
- Using ipcoal to perform coalescent simulations

## Review

#### Recombination and inheritance

#### 
The coalescent process describes the ancestry of a sample of genes as we 
trace them back through time: each pair of lineages coalesces in a common 
ancestor at a rate 1/2Ne, where Ne is the effective size of the ancestral 
population through which the lineages were passing. This remarkably simple
model for the ancestry of neutral genes, traced backwards in time, 
corresponds to the diffusion approximation, which describes how allele 
frequencies spread out as populations evolve forward in time.




## Introduction
In the last lesson we developed a simple function to generate a random
coalescent genealogy for k samples under the n-coalescent process. The
waiting times between successive coalescent events on the tree, which 
reduces the remaining number of samples from k to k-1 until all samples 
have coalesced, is determined by just a single population parameter, 
$N_e$. 

Coalescent simulation software, beginning with `ms`, etc., adding 
recombination and other extensions. 


## Simulating Evolution
- forward-in-time (WF) is slow and memory consuming.
- coalescent is very fast and small memory.
- BUT, coalescent simulations require making a number of assumptions.
	- a few of these can be relaxed in various ways.

### Coalescent software
- msprime
- tskit
- ipcoal


## Population structure
...brief introduction, more on this in chapter X.


## Recombination
...brief introduction, more on this in chapter X.



### Population Container
```py
# simulate 10 random genealogies
mod = ipcoal.Model(Ne=1000, nsamples=10)
mod.sim_trees(10)
print(mod.df)
```
...

```py
mod.draw_genealogies()
```

```py
# draw the first genealogy embedded in the population model
mod.draw_genealogy(idx=0)
```
