---
---


### Lesson 2.0

1. What is the difference between a genealogy of individuals and 
gene copies? Try drawing the history of two gene copies at a locus 
through >3 generations of ancestral individuals, and describe it? 
Do this without looking at figures from the lessons.

2. In an idealized population, and assuming no genetic linkage, 
what is the law of segregation and independent assortment, and how 
does it relate to the expected similarity of genealogies for gene 
copies at two different genes in a diploid individual? Why?

### Lesson 2.1

3. What is an idealized population?

4. How many generations does it take, in an idealized population, 
for genotype frequencies to evolve to Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium?

5. How do you compute $p$ and $q$ from the genotype frequencies in 
a population? What assumptions are important for this to be correct?

6. How do you compute genotype frequencies from the $p$ and $q$ 
in a popuation? What assumptions are important for this to be correct?

7. If a population is in HW equilibrium, what will happen to the 
genotype frequencies in the next generation?

8. Why does sampling from a Binomial distribution only approximate
the expectations of Hardy-Weinberg, rather than match it perfectly? 

### Lesson 2.2

9. What is a Wright-Fisher process? Try to describe it as concisely as you can.

10. What is an effective population size? Try to describe it as concisely 
as you can. How can $N_e$ be interpreted in a simple WF-process compared 
to in more complex models, or in real populations?

11. Draw a Wright-Fisher process for a population of 2N=10 gene copies, 
for >10 generations, including outlines around pairs of gene copies to 
represent diploid individuals.

12. Compare your drawings with others' drawings. Did you draw time 
in the same direction? Does every gene copy have one or more ancestors, 
or none? Does every gene copy have one or more descendants, or
none? Did all of the gene copies at the present coalesce within 10 generations? 
If you drawings are different in some of these respects, did one
of you make a mistake?

### Lesson 2.3

13. Why is the probability that two gene copies share a MRCA in
the previous generation 1 / 2N? Why isn't it (1 / 2N) * (1 / 2N)? Or the 
number of ways of sampling two gene copies (k * (k-2)) times 1 / 2N? It may be 
helpful to draw a WF process for a population of size N=2 and to think
about the probability of each gene copy coming from a copy in the previous
generation.

14. What is the Kingman coalescent equation? How does it relate to the 1 / 2N
equation above? Why is Kingman's equation an approximation?

### Assignment

15. Write a function to generate a random genealogy for k gene copies
given an effective population size parameters. Your function should do
the following:
	- Take `k`, `N`, and `random_seed` as integer input arguments. You can
	change the names of these if you want.
	- Return a `ToyTree` object that is ultrametric (tips aligned).
	- Implement the algorithm from page 456. 


16. Once your genealogy function is working, write another function 
to simulate 1000 genealogies from different random seeds given a k and N 
input parameters and to return the mean and variance of the time until 
all k samples coalesce.