---
---

# Distance-based tree inference


- docs/notebooks/phylogenetic-data-science/docs/chapter-1/notebooks/chapter-11.ipynb#Expected-number-of-differences


## Learning objectives for this chapter:
- The effect of homoplasy on distances.
- Algorithms for inferring trees from distances.
- Simulation practice for comparing methods.


## 


### Probability of no event
Given a Markov process with some number of possible states (e.g., 4), 
and parameters for the rates of change (e.g., $\mu$), one can derive
probabilistic statements about the state that the process is likely to 
be in after some amount of time ($t$). At first, this may seem daunting, 
given that a Markov process could take numerous possible paths through
a series of states over some amount of time. However, it turns out that
we can define several very useful probabilistic statements by simplifying
the way in which we state probabilities we wish to compute.

For example, let's start with the alpha parameter of the Jukes-Cantor model.
This parameter is 1/3, because when an event occurs in transitions to one
of three possible alternative states. 


$$ P(event,\mu,t) = e^{-\frac{4}{3}\mu t}  $$

$$ P(no\ event, \mu, t) = 1 - (e^{-\frac{4}{3}\mu t})  $$

### Prob of specific event

If there is at least one event, **no matter how many there are**, the 
probability that the last one resulted in a particular nucleotide, given 
that we are calculating event probabilities as 4$\mu$/3, is just 1/4. So, 
the probability of `C` at then end of a branch that started with `A` is:

$$ P(C|A,\mu,t) = \frac{1}{4}(1 - e^{-\frac{4}{3}\mu t})  $$


### Prob of ending in a different state

There are three states different from the starting state, so this can be calculated as:

$$
D_S = \frac{3}{4}(1 - e^{-\frac{4}{3}\mu t})
$$

```py title="plot prob. of ending in different state."
# get a range of branch lengths
branch_lengths = np.linspace(0, 5/mu, 100)

# get prob for each branch length
prob_of_diff_state = (3/4) * (1 - np.exp((-4/3) * mu * branch_lengths))

# plot probabilities
canvas = toyplot.Canvas(width=350, height=300)
axes = canvas.cartesian(
	ymax=1.0, 
	xlabel="Branch length (t)", 
	ylabel="Differences per site", 
    label="Expected Diff/site under JC69")
mark0 = axes.plot(branch_lengths, prob_of_diff_state, stroke_width=3);

# style axes
axes.x.ticks.show = True
axes.y.ticks.show = True
```

### Homoplasy


## Computing distances
### Expected distance (number of differences)
...


### Challenges with distances
Although distance-based inference methods work very nicely in theory, when
the true distances are known, in practice these distances are not known 
and must be measured from some type of data.    
- gaps and missing data: normalize for missing in each pair, or remove for all taxa?
- ascertainment bias: if morphology, were the characters selected randomly, or
because they exhibited variation? if DNA, how were base calls and alignments 
made?
- homoplasy: decay of signal over time.
- selection: ...
- rate variation: ...



### Additive distances
For distance-based tree inference ethods to work properly it is important 
that the distance matrices that compose the input data to these methods 
represent distances that are proportional to the true branch lengths between
the samples. For example, if two species share a most recent common ancestor
from which spA is a length X from it, and spB is a length Y from it, then the
distance between spA and spB should be X + Y. 

The most simple assumption might be that species will accumulate differences
linearly with time. But we can see clearly from above that that is not the
case. The expected number of observed distances will be significantly
less than expected, especially for longer branches, which plateau in the
total number of changes that are expected, as each site converges towards
a probablity of matching with prob=0.25. As a result, the number of 
differences will be underestimated, and the amount of underestimation is 
biased among sample pairs.


### Co-variance among distances
...
