---
icon: material/code-tags
---

# Installing software with conda

## What is conda?
[Conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/) is an open-source software management 
tool for installing other software, as well as their dependencies, and 
creating sandboxed environments for executing code. Using the `conda` command
line tool you can use simple commands to search for software packages, select 
specific versions, and install them locally on your machine. This automated
process makes installing and removing software simple and reproducible which makes
it easier to design, distribute and use working software.


## Why use conda?
The many advantages of using conda include:

- **command-line convenience**: the conda command line program allows you to 
search for and install tools with simple commands that can even be written
as scripts for automation. This makes it easy to replicate the set of software
tools installed on one computer onto another machine. 

- **finding dependencies**: Almost every software program builds on and requires
other software packages as dependencies. Rather than telling a user to go 
find and install each of these dependencies on their own (a sure sign of 
a poorly developed tool by today's standards) a software package manager
can instead fetch and install of the dependencies for them. This might even
include different dependencies or versions depending on their specific operating
system. This is a very complex task and something conda does very well.

- **sandboxed directory**: conda installs software into a *sandboxed* location 
on your computer (usually a directory within `$HOME`), which is done purposefully
to keep your conda software completely separate and isolated from your 
system-wide software (which is usually in `/bin` or `/usr/bin`). 
This gives you peace of mind to install, update, and remove packages as much
as you want inside of your conda directory without having to worry that it 
might ever impact your system programs. 

- **environments**: In addition to allowing you to install software programs into
a sandboxed location, conda also allows you to keep many separate *environments*,
where you can keep different sets of software or versions of them. This makes it easy 
to test software tools across different version of dependencies, or to keep 
software separate that uses different conflicting dependencies.


## Install conda (miniconda3)
There are two flavors of conda that you can install: `Anaconda` and 
`Miniconda`. Both include an installation of `Python` and the `conda` program 
(which is written in Python) as well as a few dependencies of `conda`. 
However, the two flavors differ in terms of which *other* tools come
pre-loaded with these basics. `Anaconda` comes fully loaded with dozens of 
commonly used Python packages, whereas `Miniconda` is totally minimal, and 
doesn't come with anything extra at all. I always recommend installing 
`Miniconda`, and later adding to it any software that you want to install. 

To install `Miniconda` follow the command-line instructions below, which are
derived from the [Miniconda docs]. When installing either flavor of `conda`
it is important that you select the appropriate version for your operating
system (e.g., MacOSX, Linux, Windows).

[Miniconda docs]: https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html

!!! attention

	If you are on Windows I generally recommend installing `Windows Subsystem
	for Linux (WSL2)`, which allows you to run a fully functional Linux system
	inside of your Windows machine. From there, you can then run all of the 
	Linux-based installation instructions. In general this is much more 
	reliable for running scientific software, since many tools are not
	written for Windows.


If you do not yet have `conda` installed then copy and paste the following 
code into your terminal to download and install `conda` into its default
(recommended) location in a folder in your `$HOME` directory that will be
named `miniconda3/`.

=== "Linux"
    ```bash
    # download installer script
    wget https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

    # call the installer script in batch (-b) mode
    bash Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh -b

    # call the init script (see below for description of what this does.)
    ~/miniconda3/condabin/conda init
    ```
=== "OSX"
    ```bash
    # download installer script (flag is a big letter o, not zero)
    curl -O https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-x86_64.sh

    # call the installer script in batch (-b) mode
    bash Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-x86_64.sh -b

    # call the init script (see below for description of what this does.)
    ~/miniconda3/condabin/conda init
    ```


To validate that you have `conda` properly installed you can run the 
following commands from your terminal:

```bash
# prints the path to your conda binary
which conda
```

```bash
# prints information about your conda installation
conda info
```

```bash
# prints the software currently installed in your conda directory
conda list
```


## Conda and `$PATH`

After running the commands above you will likely see a small change to
the text that is shown before the cursor in your terminal. Perhaps it 
shows something like `(base)`. This is telling you the name of the `conda`
environment that you currently have loaded. An environment is simply a 
subfolder within your `miniconda3/` directory where software is stored.
You can create multiple environments with different sets of software for
different projects. If you just installed `conda` then your base environment
will hardly have any software in it.

The purpose of having an environment *loaded* is to make software from 
that particular folder accessible. This relates to the way that you shell
looks for software, which is by looking in a set of specified folders in 
order until it either finds the first occurrence of the requested software
name, or no occurrence of it. This set of ordered folders is called your
`PATH` variable, and you can view it from the command shell. Below I 
show an example in a Linux shell:

```bash
# show your current shell PATH variable
echo $PATH

# /home/deren/miniconda3/bin:/home/deren/miniconda3/condabin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/usr/games:/usr/local/games:/snap/bin
```

This shows multiple paths to directories each separated by a colon. 
You should notice that there are two references to `miniconda3` in the 
`PATH`. One points to `.../miniconda3/condabin/...` and another to 
`.../miniconda3/bin`. The former is the location where your
`conda` binary is located -- the tool that is used to call `conda` commands
including loading or deactivating environments. The second is a path
to binaries (programs) in the base `conda` environment. This includes the 
version of `Python` that is installed. 

Towards the end of the `PATH` you will find references to other directories 
such as `/usr/bin`. These are places where *system-wide* software is 
located. `Python` is also used by most operating systems to complete 
mundane tasks, but that system-wide version is different from the one we 
just installed -- they are installed in different places. So, when we now
type `python` (the name of the program to start a `Python` interpreter) into 
the terminal it needs to decide which of the multiple versions of `python` 
present on the system it should execute. Because the binary in our 
`miniconda3` directory is located *before* the path to the system-wide binary
in our `PATH` variable the miniconda version will be loaded. 

We can verify this quickly by deactivating the `conda` environment, and then
re-loading it. This is something worth becoming comfortable with. You want 
to know which `conda` environment is loaded at any time so you know which 
software versions you are working with (*this is why the env name is shown
is the prompt of your terminal*).

```bash
# deactivate the current conda env
conda deactivate

# print the PATH now (`miniconda/bin` should be gone)
echo $PATH

# re-activate the conda environment
conda activate base

# print the PATH again (`miniconda/bin` should be back)
echo $PATH
```

Now that you have conda installed you can use it to install software, 
create and load environments, and/or remove software and environments.
See the following [conda cheatsheet] for some tips on available commands.

[conda cheatsheet]: https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/4.6.0/_downloads/52a95608c49671267e40c689e0bc00ca/conda-cheatsheet.pdf


## Installing packages (using channels)

Many many many software packages are available to install using `conda`. 
The best way to find instructions to install a tool is to google search
*'conda install tool-name'*. (You can also run the command `conda search toolname`
from a terminal, but I find the former is generally faster).
This will provide the proper instructions for installing the package, 
including the name of a *channel* from which it should be installed. 
Here is an example that will install the `requests` Python package from 
the `conda-forge` channel.

```bash
# install the requests Python package from the conda-forge channel
conda install requests -c conda-forge
```

!!! tip
	The channel `conda-forge` is special in that it contains very up-to-date
	versions of most common Python packages. In this way, it serves as an 
	alternative to the standard channel (listing no channel at all). If you
	use `conda-forge` for some packages, it is generally recommended to use
	it for *all* of your packages, otherwise, you will continually have 
	versions of standard Python dependencies being switched back and forth
	between super up-to-date versions from conda-forge and not quite as 
	up-to-date versions from the standard channel. The easiest way to ensure
	that you don't forget to do this is to set `conda-forge` as your 
	*default channel*, which you can do with the following command:

	```bash
	conda config --add channels conda-forge
	```


## Creating an environment

As mentioned already, you can create separate environments and install
separate versions of software into them. As an example, let's create a 
new environment called 'test', install a package into it, and then 
remove it, since it is just a test example. This example also shows another
important lesson: you can list multiple channels which will be searched in
sorted order (like PATH) to find the package and its dependencies. Here I 
install `raxml` which will look first in the `conda-forge` and then `bioconda`
channels.

```bash
# create new env, activate, install softare, and call software
conda create -n test
conda activate test
conda install raxml -c conda-forge -c bioconda
raxmlHPC -v
```

```bash
# switch back to the 'base' env and remove 'test' env
conda activate base
conda env remove -n test
```

## An environment for this textbook

Finally, we've reached the point where you are ready to install all of the 
software associated with exercises in this textbook. As you might expect, 
I recommend installing this into a conda environment. This can be done
easily using a special file called `environment.yml`, which is used to 
provide instructions to conda for installing many packages. 

??? info "example environment.yml file"

	```yaml
	name: phylodatascience
	channels:
	  - conda-forge
	  - bioconda
	dependencies:
	  - python>=3.7
	  - jupyter
	  - numpy
	  - pandas
	  - scipy
	  - numba
	  - loguru
	  - toytree>=3.0
	  - msprime>=1.0
	  - raxml
	  # ...TODO
	```


You can get this file by cloning the `git` repository for this textbook. 

```bash
# clone the repo to a location (I use ~/Documents/) and cd into it.
cd ~/Documents/
git clone https://github.com/eaton-lab/phylogenetic-data-science
cd phylogenetic-data-science/

# create new env and install all dependencies into it.
conda env create -f environment.yml

# activate this environment
conda activate phylodatascience
```

