---
---

# Diving into Python types

An introduction to basic types in Python is outside of the scope of this
textbook. If needed, I refer readers to the official Python [tutorial].
Instead, this section will focus on describing differences among 
commonly used types and specifically why some types are used over others
in certain situations. As this comes up in coding exercises in the 
textbook this section will be referred back to.



## Mutable versus Immutable
<!-- When to use lists versus tuples. Most beginning Python programmers will use
`list` objects much more commonly than `tuple` objects.   -->
Two popular ways of storing a list of element in Python are `list` and `tuple`.
Here we discuss the main differences between these types and when to use one over
the other.  

The main difference is that Lists are mutable and Tuples are not. 

Elements can be replaced, added, or removed from lists.
```python
my_list = [1, 2, 'a', 'b', 'b']
my_list[0] = '1' # note that here 1 is and string and not an numeric 
```

However, elements CANNOT be replaced, added, or removed from tuples.
```python
my_tup = (1, 2, 'a', 'b', 'b')
my_tup[0] = '1'         # raises a TypeError
```

<!-- 
C: I think we should remove this, if a coder wants to modify a tuple, better use lists
This can create the typical confusion of why using a tuple or a list if both are "mutable" after all 
my_tup = my_tup[:3]     # to mutate create a new tuple to replace previous one. 
-->


For this reason, tuples lack of most of the methods that are found in list, 
with exception of `index` and `count`. 
```python
my_list.remove('a') # remove a specific element from the list
my_list.append('c') # append a new element at the end of the list
my_list.insert(1, "n") # insert a new element in the index 1, moving all elements one index
```

All these methods define what `list` are intended for, storing a list of elements that COULD
be updated in future instructions.

The lack of all these methods in tuples, making it a "lighter" type than a list (in terms of bytes 
used by the machine).
```python
my_list = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
my_tup = (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)

from sys import getsizeof 
print(f'''
Size in bytes of my_list: {getsizeof(my_list)}
Size in bytes of my_tup: {getsizeof(my_tup)}
''')
```

This characteristic of tuples and its inmutability make them good for other uses.
They work perfectly to maintain the integrity of a list of elements that you do not
want to modify, reducing conflicts with other parts of your code.
Because they are lighter, they are the best option in big projects in terms of 
reducing running times and memory optiimization.
However, one of the most important feature of tuples is that they are hashables. 
In the following section about hashing and dictionaries, this feature will be explored. 

So if your list of elements will be static once you create it, it is recommended to
use `tuple` instead of a `list`.

**Additional note**: Some implicit declarations of variables in Python can be tricky. 
For example, the following code will result in a tuple of one element 
instead of a variable storing a string.
```python
var = "something", # note the trailing comma
```




## Hashing, Sets and Dictionaries
...

## Arrays and DataFrames (not native types)
...

<!-- ## Numpy arrays -->

```python
arr = np.array([0, 1, 2, 3])
```

```python
arr = np.arange(4)
```

```python
arr = np.zeros(4)
for idx in arr.shape[0]:
	arr[idx] = idx
```



[tutorial]: https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/


