
# Python Style Guide

Python is a scripting language that is intended to be easy to read and write,
and this underlies much of its popularity and growth over the last few 
decades. 

- speed
- evolution
- interactivity
- jit-compilation
- data science revolution
- libraries 
- machine learning

### Docstrings
A documentation string (docstring) is used to provide information about 
a piece of code. For any public-facing part of your code, this should 
include sufficient description that a user can understand what the code
is for, how to use it, and what to expect as a result. For private parts
of your code, not intended to be viewed by users, docstrings are still 
incredibly useful.

### Online documentation
Sphinx, mkdocs, and other tools can be used to build documentation for a 
package, including tutorials, etc. In fact this textbook was made using 
a version of mkdocs called mkdocs-material. Automated documentation is 
useful because you can make it update each time you make changes to the 
code. 

### Automating documentation
A benefit of automating documentation is that in addition to the documentation
that you write yourself, using markdown or REST, parts of your documentation
can also be build automatically by extracting information from the docstrings
in your code. To do so, you must properly format the docstrings, and thus 
a number of *standardized* formats have been developed. These are useful not
only because they can be parsed and understood by code, but following these
practices will also make your documentation easier to understand, since users
will recognize the common format it is written in. 

#### Sphinx style
See example here or here.

#### Numpy style
Seee examples here. This is the style that I prefer, since it is more human 
readable than sphinx style, and can still be parsed by sphinx.

### Black style
As with most languages, Python is flexible in allowing users to write code
in various ways to accomplish the same task. 



### Examples

```py
def get_num_nodes(tree: toytree.Toytree) -> int:
	"""Return the number of nodes in a tree.

	Example
	-------
	>>> tree = toytree.rtree.rtree(10)
	>>> print(get_num_nodes(tree))
	"""
    return len(tree.idx_dict)
```




*[syntax]: The set of rules for proper function of a coding language
