
# Python Styles

Python is a scripting language that is intended to be easy to read and write,
and this underlies much of its popularity and growth over the last few 
decades.

<!-- - speed
- evolution
- interactivity
- jit-compilation
- data science revolution
- libraries 
- machine learning -->

Python was designed as a high human readable programing language;
nevertheless, this programing language is pretty flexible and does not enforce its writing
in certain ways (e.g. upper or lower case for declaring variables). 
For that reason, it is common to find high variability in the style of
writing from one developer to another. The only major constraint that 
can be found in Python is the mandatory indentation, which is absent
in most of modern programming languages.

It is for this reason that there are some proposed styles that help 
developers to write code having in mind its high readabilit. Having a 
very organized code is important in order to comunicate the purpose of it
to other developers, or even for you months before a piece of code was 
written. The style guidelines not only are useful for the coding organization
itself, they are also handy for the documentation of all functionality
embedded in the code.

There are two main topics about styling, documentation styling and coding styling.
Both are related, but they count with different style guidelines to follow.


## Documentation styling

### Docstrings
As we saw in function definitions, a documentation string (docstring) 
is used to provide information about 
a piece of code. For any public-facing part of your code, this should 
include sufficient description that a user can understand what the code
is for, how to use it, and what to expect as a result. For private parts
of your code, not intended to be viewed by users, docstrings are still 
incredibly useful.

### Online documentation
Sphinx, mkdocs, and other tools can be used to build documentation for a 
package, including tutorials, etc. In fact this textbook was made using 
a version of mkdocs called mkdocs-material. Automated documentation is 
useful because you can make it update each time you make changes to the 
code. 

### Automating documentation
A benefit of automating documentation is that in addition to the documentation
that you write yourself, using markdown or REST, parts of your documentation
can also be build automatically by extracting information from the docstrings
in your code. To do so, you must properly format the docstrings, and thus 
a number of *standardized* formats have been developed. These are useful not
only because they can be parsed and understood by code, but following these
practices will also make your documentation easier to understand, since users
will recognize the common format it is written in. 

### Examples

#### Sphinx style
See example here or here.

#### Numpy style
Seee examples here. This is the style that I prefer, since it is more human 
readable than sphinx style, and can still be parsed by sphinx.


## Coding styling
Coding style is optional but highly advisable. It does not affect the functionality of your code.
It is for this reason, that even if your code is not very friendly in terms of
readibility, it still can do a good job.

There are some practices that may affect subtly the readibility of a code, for
example: the maximum lenght that a line can have (usually people limit it to 80 characters)
or the quotation marks that you used (Black guideline recommends use `"` instead of `'`)
However, there are some other practices that are more commonly avoided because they affect 
in a considerable way the comprehension of the code. One of those cases are the all in one-line instructions.

The following snippet is a one-line version of the code seen in DataFrame part of this bootcamp.
It is still functional, but it is very hard to read and difficult debug to some extent.
```Python
import pandas as pd
pd.concat([pd.DataFrame({'Column+one': ['A', 'B', 'C', 'D', 'E', 'F'], 'Column_2': ['s', 't', 'r', 'i', 'n', 'g'], 'Column*3': [1, 2, 3, 4, 4, 3]}),pd.DataFrame([['E','n', 4],['F', 'g', 3]], columns=['Column+one', 'Column_2', 'Column*3'])])
```

In order to avoid these kind of practices, members of Python community commonly 
update some guidelines. The main resource for styling Python coding is the [official style guide for 
Python code or PEP 8](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/).

There are some tools to help to maintain some styles. 
Linters are software that scan code in search for some potential inconsistencies regarding with 
some styling guideline. One of the most popular linters for Python is (Pylint)[https://pylint.org/] 
which is fully compliant with PEP 8.
Formatters are software that not only scan the code to check some styling problems, but also they 
offer an automatic alternative version following some predefined guidelines. 
One example of this category is (Black)[https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html]. 
Black can be tested in this web service https://black.vercel.app/

Some of these Linters or Formatters, define may their our guidelines; for example Black
is defined by their proponents and developers as a strict subset of PEP 8.

Developers should keep in mind that code it is intended not only 
to make a computer do something, but also it is a tool to comunicate
some ideas to other developers. It is for this reason that styling can be very
useful. Nonetheless, styling is not a mandatory or an strict rule. Finally, it is
decision of each team to agree what kind of practices they can incorporate in their
coding routine that fit better with their developing enviroment.

### Examples
#### PEP 8 - Official Style Guide for Python Code








 


*[syntax]: The set of rules for proper function of a coding language
