---
---

# Tree Inference (Parsimony) (TO BE UPDATED)

<!-- ALL BELOW HERE IS FROM NB [] SAVED AS MARKDOWN. -->
## Learning objectives
By the end of this notebook you will:

1. Understand the principle of *maximum parsimony*.
2. Be able to calculate a Fitch Parsimony score for data given a tree.
3. Know how to count evolutionary changes along branches of a tree.


## Phylogenetic inference
This chapter is the first in a series that will continue throughout several
of the following chapters, which together will introduce the most common
algorithmic and statistical methods for inferring phylogenetic trees from 
data.

The challenge of inferring phylogenetic trees has been a topic of interest 
to biologists, mathematicians, statisticians, and computer scientists for 
over half a century. In this time, numerous approaches have been developed 
that differ in philosophical principles; in the evolutionary assumptions that
they make; in their statistical consistency; in the types of data they
can be applied to; and in many other ways. 


## History of tree inference
- Algorithmic approaches begin in the 1950's with the growing availability 
of computers.
- Prior to this, was the development of *evolutionary systematics*, during the 
modern synthesis. 
- [Hennig], cladistics, 


Although phylogenies have been
used to describe evolutionary relationships among taxa since Darwin, the 
application of algorithmic approaches to inferring trees arose only much 
later, with the availability of computers in the 1950s. Prior to this, 


[Hennig]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Willi_Hennig


## The principle of parsimony
The principle of parsimony, also termed [*Occam's razor*], is widely used in
biology as a technique for finding a solution to a problem. It advocates
that when presented with competing hypotheses about the same prediction -- 
such as different phylogenetic hypotheses for a set of samples -- one should
select the solution that requires the fewest assumptions. In evolutionary 
terms, this is often interpreted to mean that the most *parsimonious* 
solution is the one that requires the fewest observed evolutionary changes.

[*Occam's razor*]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Occam's_razor


Terminology
-----------

- make this as a table...

- convergence
- homoplasy
- monophyletic
- paraphyletic
- systematics
- cladistics
- evolutionary taxonomy/systematics
- Linnaean taxonomy
- ...


References
-----------
- Felsenstein chapter 10
- Wikipedia articles...
- 