
# Tree Thinking (TO BE UPDATED)

:material-star: *Follow along in a binder jupyter notebook:*
[:material-notebook: tree-thinking.ipynb](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/eaton-lab/phylogenetic-data-science/HEAD?filepath=docs%2Fchapter-1%2Fnotebooks%2Ftree-thinking.ipynb)

<!-- ALL BELOW HERE IS FROM NB [] SAVED AS MARKDOWN. -->
## Learning objectives
By the end of this notebook you will:

1. Be able to interpret relationships on a phylogenetic tree.
2. Have increased understanding of the newick format for storing tree data.
3. Know how to root, unroot, and re-root phylogenetic trees.
4. Be more familiar with the toytree Python package.


<!-- ## Notes
- label more things as pitfalls:
	- interpreting unrooted trees wrong.
	- interpreting lineages as "basal" or "early branching" as ancestral. (Omland, Cook and Crisp).
 -->



## Understanding evolution using tree-thinking

The philosopher of science Robert O'Hara stated, *"It is impossible to really understand evolution without an ability to accurately interpret phylogenetic trees"*, and that *"evolution itself is a theory of evolutionary trees"* (O'Hara 1988, 1997). In biology generally, and in this book already, you have seen several examples of phylogenetic trees. But have you thought carefully about how to interpret these trees, and what information is being presented? There are actually several common pitfalls that most beginners make when interpreting phylogenetic trees, and that even practiced biologists often commit as well. Recognizing and avoiding these mistakes will make you a better biologist, by allowing you to better question and interpret hypotheses about evolutionary relationships from trees.

## Phylogenetic trees
A phylogenetic tree is a hypothesis of the inferred evolutionary relationships among a set of samples; the units represented at the tips. Sometimes, when we have fossil or ancient DNA data, we may have additional information about ancestral (internal) nodes in a tree. At the extreme, we may even have historical samples that are direct ancestors of later samples, such as in experimental evolution studies. However, most of the time, the observed samples are represented as tips of a phylogeny, and all of other information represents a hypothesis. It is an attempt to describe a model of how a set of samples are related through evolutionary history.

The way we interact with phylogenetic trees most frequently is as images. Most people have seen a phylogeny in a museum, or television program, or in the news. Phylogenies are ubiquitous throughout biology, where they are used to describe the relationships among species, populations, individuals (genealogies), genes, and gene copies. However, not all tree diagrams are phylogenies. Many other types of hierarchically structured data can also be visualized as trees, but often with a very different interpretation. 

<!-- The next few sub-chapters will focus on trees as a data structure, to discuss the type of information contained in treees, while being agnostic about whether it is a phylogenetic tree, or
a more generic tree structure.
 -->
Phylogenetic trees are distinct in that they are explicitly intended to represent evolution. This has consequence for how internal nodes in phylogenetic trees should be interpreted (as common ancestors), for the directionality in which they should read (root-to-tip, or vice versa), and for the types of relationships and information that can be extracted (i.e., how to describe evolutionary relationships).


## More than an image
Although we most often see phylogenetic trees as images, they can also be interpreted as statistical models. At its minimum, a phylogenetic tree represents a set of ancestor-descendant relationships. In addition, it may include information such as edge lengths that describe the magnitude of divergence between sets of samples; or probabilities/weights as measures of confidence/support for relationships. Many additional types of information can be contained in a phylogenetic tree that together represent a rich description of evolution, and often relate to parameters of the statistical inference method that was used to infer the phylogeny.


## Trees in Python
<!-- If we just distinguished btween a phylogeny and non-phylo tree, then here 
we want to say that working with trees as cmoputational data structures can 
help to understand how to interpret phylogenetic trees, since the data sructure
itself imposes constraints...? 
 -->
The best way to start to understand phylogenies as a type of data, as opposed to simply a drawing, is to explore the use of trees as computational data structures. Below we will use the toytree Python package to load, manipulate, draw, and deconstruct trees to better understand the type of information contained in phylogenetic trees. In the chapters that follow this one, we will dive deeper into
tree data structures, both as a general concept, and more specifically in terms of how to code a Toytree-like class in Python.

```py
import toytree
```


### Newick data format
The text string below defines a tree in [newick format]. When researchers are working with phylogenetic trees as data, this is the main type of data they are working with: simple text files!
This format is quite flexible. It could contain just the relationships -- described by nested parentheses like below -- or it can contain additional information such as branch lengths and/or support values, which we'll discuss more in a later chapter. You can see how the nested hierarchical relationship of a phylogeny (clades nested within clades) is easily represented by sets of parentheses nested within sets of parentheses.

In the Python code block below, a string (the text contained within quotations) is stored to a variable that we will name `newick1`. The name of the variable is arbitrary, we could have named it anything. Now we can reuse this object by referring to `newick1`, as we do in the next code block.

[newick format]: https://evolution.genetics.washington.edu/phylip/newicktree.html

```py
# create a string variable storing a tree in newick format.
newick1 = "(gibbon, (orangutan, (gorilla, (chimp, human))));"
```

### A tree object
We can now parse this newick string to get a `ToyTree` object, which is a way
of representing a tree data structure in Python. Here this is done by calling
the function `toytree.tree` and using our newick string as a input argument
to the function. The return `ToyTree` object is then stored as a new variable
named `tree1`. This new object has many functions associated with it for 
manipulating, drawings, comparing, and extracting information about trees, 
as will see soon.

```py
# parse the 'newick1' string into a ToyTree object named 'tree1'
tree1 = toytree.tree(newick1)
```

This `ToyTree` object is a Python class instance. We can see this by calling
the `print` statement on it to see its representation, which simply states 
that it is a `toytree.ToyTree` object, followed by some information about its 
position in memory. 

```py
# this ToyTree is just a Python class object in memory.
print(tree1)
```
```py
# <toytree.ToyTree at 0x7f42cc7d3550>
```

### Drawing and interpreting trees

Below is visualization of this tree created by calling the `.draw` function 
of the `ToyTree` object with a styling argument that shows an integer label 
for every node.

This tree is rooted, with the gibbon as the outgroup (more on what this 
means in a minute). Because we know that the tree is rooted, we can interpret 
the evolutionary relationships by reading from the tips towards the root of 
the tree. To do so, select any two tips and trace back along their edges until
you find the node where they meet. That is their most recent common ancestor 
(MRCA). Ancestors are by definition older than their descendants. Two 
samples which share a younger MRCA are more closely related than two samples 
that share an older MRCA. Using this method, we can identify which samples 
are more closely related to each other than others.

```py
# call .draw function of tree1 to return a drawing that will display
tree1.draw(tree_style='s');
```



<!-- 
## Understanding evolution
The term *tree thinking* was coined by Baum, Smith, and Donovan [^1], and
elaborated by Baum and Offner [^2], and Baum and Smith [^3], as a conceptual
framework for teaching and studying evolution. It harkens to Darwin's 
description of evolution by natural selection as a process of "descent with
modification" [^4] by highlighting the importance of the "tree-like" 
structure of the evolutionary process -- tracing descendants back to their
common ancestor -- as a way to communicate and understand evolution.
 -->

<!-- 
## Evolution in and on trees
The philosopher of science Robert O'Hara stated *"It is impossible to really
understand evolution without an ability to accurately interpret 
phylogenetic trees"*, and that *"evolution itself is a theory of 
evolutionary trees"* [^5].

He argued that *tree thinking* represents an alternative to *population 
thinking*, in which ...

Tree thinking recognizes that species are not  independent replicates  within a class (as earlier group thinkers had tended to see them), but are instead  inter- connected parts of an evolutionary tree. It lays emphasis on the explanation of evolytionary  events in the  context of a  tree, rather than on the  states exhibited by collections of species, and it  sees evolutionary history as a story of divergence rather than a story of development.

Most people have seen a phylogenetic tree, whether in a museum, on a 
television program, or in the news; but what does a phylogenetic
tree represent? And why is it important to understand? There are actually
several common pitfalls that one can fall into when reading phylogenetic 
trees without a having spent time considering their meaning. Recognizing 
these mistakes will make you a better biologist. 

These errors can often persist even among practicing evolutionary biologists.

We'll cover some of 
these pitfalls in this notebook. One of the best ways to learn to and test
your understanding of phylogenetic trees is through visualizations.
 -->

<!-- 

### What is represented at the tips?

<div class="alert alert-success">
    <h3>Box 1:</h3> 
    
Look at Figures 1-3 in the paper by Baum and Offner. In this paper they are describing how to teach literacy in reading phylogenetic trees. What are they trying to depict through these three figures? Why is this a useful approach to teaching phylogenetics?
</div>

[^4] O'Hara 1988
[^5] O'Hara 1997

[^6] Card, Kyle J., Misty D. Thomas, Joseph L. Graves, Jeffrey E. Barrick, and Richard E. Lenski. 2021. “Genomic Evolution of Antibiotic Resistance Is Contingent on Genetic Background Following a Long-Term Experiment with Escherichia Coli.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118 (5). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2016886118.

 -->

<!-- below is copied from notebook: ... 

-->
## WRITE IN A NOTEBOOK BELOW...

## Common ancestry

<!-- Feeback from class:

- move discussion of basal trichotomy to later newick chapter.
- discuss using terms 'basal', and suggest using 'sister'
- discuss how a tree represents what is sampled, and not what is missing.
	- internal node is an ancestor of the samples, but probably also of many others not sampled.
- more about using outgroups. What if they are hard to find, or too distant. use midpoint.
- later in the ML section perhaps talk more about midpoint rooting, and rate diffs.
- maybe make your own version of Figure 1-2?
 -->

### Terminology

Trees, undirected cyclic graph.


Edges, branches, ...


Nodes, vertices, ...


### Rotation


### Rooting


### Units
What are the units of branch lengths in a tree? As we learned in chapter 1.1, 
trees can be used to represent many different things, and so there is no one
answer for this. 


### Tree shapes

Special shapes: 
	- caterpillar or ladder tree.
	- balanced tree
	- fan, comb, or unresolved tree.

Random trees.
	- 

### Tree shapes as data
- analysis of tree shapes using ABC for ...
- analysis of tree shapes for diversification ...

This methods seem to have fallen out of favor, as they are less commonly
employed as more powerful statistical methods have been developed for testing
hypotheses about diversification rates (cite), and further statistical 
developments have highlighted challenges to simpler methods in distinguishing
between alternative hypotheses for observed patterns of trees.


### References
[^1]: 
	Baum, David A., Stacey DeWitt Smith, and Samuel S. S. Donovan. 2005. “The Tree-Thinking Challenge.” Science 310 (5750): 979–80. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1117727.
[^2]: 
	Baum, David A., and Susan Offner. 2008. “Phylogenics & Tree-Thinking.” The American Biology Teacher 70 (4): 222–29. https://doi.org/10.1662/0002-7685(2008)70[222:PT]2.0.CO;2.
[^3]: 
	Baum, David A., and Stacey D. Smith. 2012. Tree Thinking: An Introduction to Phylogenetic Biology. 1st edition. Greenwood Village, Colo: W. H. Freeman.
[^4]:
	Darwin, Charles. 1859. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, Or, The Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life. J. Murray.

