
# Tree Visualization

<!-- :material-star: *Follow along in a binder jupyter notebook:* -->
<!-- [:material-notebook: tree-visualization.ipynb](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/eaton-lab/hack-the-planet/HEAD?filepath=notebooks/nb-1.1-jupyter.ipynb). -->

A core purpose of inferring phylogenetic trees is to interpret evolutionary
relationships, and to assess confidence in the results. A first step in 
doing so is usually to visualize a tree, examining the topology, edge 
lengths, and additional meta-data, such as confidence scores recorded by 
the inference software. One may infer multiple trees using different sets 
of data, or inference tools, or parameter settings of those tools, and the 
differences among many different inferred trees will often be reported in 
a publication. In this way, tree visualizations serve a purpose not only 
for communicating scientific findings to others, but also as a core tool
that researchers use to interpret their own results. Learning how to 
work with tree visualization tools efficiently is an important skill.

## Tree visualization tools
A large number of tree visualization tools are now available, ranging 
from desktop applications with a graphical user interface, such as 
Mesquite, FigTree, or Dendroscope; to simple and fast web-based apps 
like icytree, phyd3, and TreeTom. These represent 
a huge step forward from the days of hand-drawn trees, allowing for 
the production of customized publication-quality figures by simply loading
a newick file and clicking a few buttons. 

As we will see in the following chapters, there are great advantages to
working with phylogenetic trees not only as drawings of evolutionary 
relationships, but also as data objects. And this approach has advantages
for creating tree visualizations as well. This type of computational approach
to working with trees is practiced in several scientific coding languages, 
such as in the `ape`, `phytools`, and `ggtree` packages in R, and `ete3`, 
`dendropy`, and `toytree` packages in Python. These allow users to write 
scripts to customize the visualization of trees and associated data, 
which also serves as a basis for exploring and interpreting information 
for tree-based scientific analyses.

## Trees as data objects
The next two chapters will walk through how to develop simple `Node` and
`Tree` class objects in Python, similar to the core objects in the 
`toytree` package. As an aside, an optional chapter is also available to 
dive deeper into designing effective user-facing class objects in Python 
that provides some further explanation of how `toytree` works. The example
classes we will create are simplified to introduce and emphasize core 
concepts about extracting data from tree objects. Once familiar with the 
data that exists in trees, its format, and how to extract it, you will see 
that creating tree visualizations from this data is relatively simple.
<!-- This introduction to working with trees as data objects with  -->

<!-- 
## The *toytree* library
# TO BE UPDATED w/ notebook material...
Before we dive into understanding the inner-workings of tree drawing 
algorithms, however, let's first walk through some examples to 
see what is possible using an established tree visualization library in 
Python, by using the package `toytree`.

Toytree [^1] is a Python package for ...
Throughout this textbook you will become very familiar with `toytree`, which
was developed by authors of this textbook.  -->


<!-- 

## References


[^1]:
	Felsenstein... 
[^2]:
	Donoghue and Doyle...
[^3]:
	ete3...
[^4]:
	ape...
[^5]:
	ggtree...
 -->