
# Code: An example Node and Tree class

A tree can be represented in a variety of ways. Looking at a tree drawing 
we can try to identify what the core features are that must be represented.

(1) Which Nodes connect to others (edges); (2) the lengths of these
connections (edge lengths). This simplest form can be represented with 
a table, like the example below.

Storing trees as a table has potential benefits over alternative approaches.
For one, a table is very memory efficient. If you have a tree with 1 million
Nodes this could be stored in the space required for storing two columns
of 1 million integers. This fact is taken advantage of in software tools
like `tskit`, which is used to study collections of genealogical trees 
across entire genomes, which can include millions of trees of large 
size, where similarities among trees are recorded in the same table, rather
than by duplicating their records. We will cover this in chapter XX.

While tables can be efficient for storing and studying fixed trees, they 
are not the most efficient when the tree structure needs to be mutable, i.e.,
when we plan to modify the tree at various times by adding and/or 
removing Nodes from the tree.
Depending on where the new Nodes are placed, we will need to increment the
labels of each Node to update which ones are connected to which. Similarly, 
if we wanted to re-root the tree, or change other attributes such as the edge
lengths. 

For example, say we wanted to find the names of all descendants of internal 
Node "F" in the tree above. Using a table this would multiple lookups in the
table to ask which nodes are directly descended from "F", and then which are
descended from those descendants. In Python, a table would likely be stored
as an array, ndarray, or DataFrame, where such lookups are fast in absolute
terms, but still slow relative to an alternative approach.

An alternative is to store the Nodes as a Tree data structure. In general 
terms, this can be done in any object-oriented programming language where
arbitrary class objects can be created memory, and references among these 
objects can also be stored. This approach to object-oriented programming 
(OOP) is widely used, especially in languages like C, Java, and Python.

Doing so requires tracing the connections among nodes, from one to the next,
in a certain order. This process, termed a `tree traversal`, turns out to 
be a very common algorithm used throughout computer science. Consequently,
the development of tree data structures have been well studied. For example,
the file system on your computer represents a tree data structure, where 
folders are nested within folders nested within folders. File browsers and 
other computer programs `traverse` the file system frequently, for example 
when looking for files of a certain name or type. This process could be 
accomplished by storing the names and types of all files in memory at once, 
however, it is much more efficient to simply look inside each subfolder at 
a time, as it is visited, during the traversal process. Moreover, if you have
some idea of where the file you are looking for is located, you can start the
search from that location and only files *descended* (nested within) that 
location will be searched. 

We will find that traversal strategies are a core concept in developing and
using tree-based algorithms. This makes them not only central to certain 
computational methods, but also central to many algorithms used in 
evolutionary biology.

### OOP
Let's develop a Tree class object. Here we will benefit from object 
oriented programming, and this lesson will serve to introduce some core
concepts of OOP.

A tree is composed of Nodes and Edges. These could each be represented by 
an object in memory, however, a more common approach when working with 
tree or graph data structures is to simply represent Nodes in memory, and
for Edges to represent the relationships among Node objects.

### Node class 
A single Node of a tree can either be a terminal, internal, or root Node.
A terminal node has no descendants, this is sometimes referred to its 
degree=1 (reference), because it has one edge in (its parent), and no edges
out (no descendants). An internal Node by contrast has degree >= 2, since it
has a parent in addition to one or more descendants. Finally, a root node 
can have degree >= 2, but it does not have a parent edge, only descendants.

Each of these can be represented by a class object that simply store other 
objects as its parent and children. Let's start with a simple example.


```py
from __future__ import annotations
from typing import Tuple, Optional


class NodeBase:
    """A Node instance that can connect with other Nodes to form a Tree.
    
    Parameters
    ----------
    name: str
        ...
    dist: float
        ...

    Attributes
    ----------
    children: Tuple
        A tuple of Node instances that are descended from this Node.
    up: Node or None
        A Node that is ancestral to this Node, or None if this Node is root.
    """
    def __init__(self, name: str="", dist: float=0.):
        self.name = str(name)
        self.dist = float(dist)

        # attributes
        self.children: Tuple[Node] = ()
        self.up: Optional[Node] = None

    def __repr__(self) -> str:
        """Return string representation of the Node relationship"""
        children = [i.name for i in self.children]
        parent = self.up.name if self.up else 'None'
        return f"<Node {self.name}, up={parent}, children={children}>"

    def is_leaf(self) -> bool:
        """Return True if Node is a leaf (i.e., no children)"""
        return bool(self.children)

    def is_root(self) -> bool:
        """Return True if Node is the root."""
        return self.up is None

    def add_child(self, node: Node) -> None:
        """Add a Node as a child to this one."""
        node.up = self
        self.children += (node,)
```

```py
node_a = Node("a")
node_b = Node("b")
node_c = Node("c")
```


### Traversal

A key feature of tree objects is the process of traversal, by which each 
Node is visited in some determined order. Traversal algorithms make it 
possible to calculate information on trees fast and efficiently, typically
by performing calculations on parts of the tree which can be used for later
calculations. Examples of this include `Felsenstein's pruning algorithm`, 
which we will cover later, as an efficient traversal algorithm for calculating
parsimony or likelihood scores on trees (citation). Here we will first cover
a more simple example, showing how traversal provides an efficient method for
calculating the Node coordinate layout for plotting trees.

As a toy example let's extend our Node class object by creating a superclass
-- a class that inherits the properties of the Node class, but also contains
additional attributes or functions that are defined. Here we are using 
the class extending only as a teaching tool, to break up the description of 
this class into smaller chunks. However, we will later see examples where 
...
This class will have the same `__init__` as the NodeBase, meaning that it
also takes an optional name and dist values.


```py
from typing import Generator
from collections import deque

class Node(NodeBase):
    """Tree is a superclass of Node with traversal functions.

    """

    def _traverse_in_root_to_tip_order(self) -> Generator:
        """Yield all nodes in order of n descendants from root to tips."""
        # start with root in queue. When queue is empty traversal is finished.
        queue = deque([self])
        while queue:
            
            # return the left-most node in the queue. yield returns current
            # state while allowing the func to resume (i.e., a generator).
            node = queue.popleft()
            yield node

            # append the node's children to the right end of the queue
            queue.extend(node.children)

    def _traverse_in_tips_to_root_order(self) -> Generator:
        """Yield all nodes in order by visiting children before parents."""
        stack1 = deque([self])
        stack2 = deque()

        while stack1:

            # pop a node from stack1 and append to stack2
            node = stack1.pop()
            stack2.append(node)

            # append left and right of current node to stack1
            stack1.append()
            if not node.is_leaf():
                queue.extend()
            else:
                yield node

    def _traverse_parents_then_children(self) -> Generator:
        """Yield all nodes in order of parents before children."""
        queue = deque()
        node = self
        while node is not None:

            # attach current node's children to front of queue
            queue.extendleft(node.children[::-1])

            # return the current node
            yield node


            # update node from left of queue
            try:
                node = queue.popleft()
            except IndexError:
                node = None
```

### Create a simple tree
This is a simplified version of a function we used in the last lesson to 
generate a random tree of connected Nodes in `toytree`, using the function
`toytree.rtree.imbtree`. The function below will return an imbalanced tree
by starting with a root Node and adding pairs of children iteratively to 
the right descendant Node until the number of connected tip Nodes reaches
the requested number (ntips). It also extends the `dist` attribute of the 
left child Node each iteration 

```py
def ladder_tree(ntips: int):
    """Return a ladder-like tree of Node objects."""
    # create root Node and select it as current focal node
    node = root = Node(name="root")

    for idx in range(0, ntips, 2):
        # add two children to the focal node
        node.add_child(Node(idx, dist=1))
        node.add_child(Node(idx + 1, dist=1))

        # make right child the new focal node
        node = node.children[1]
    return root
```





```py
for node in 

