---
---


:material-star: *Follow along in a jupyter notebook on binder:*
[:material-notebook: Node-class.ipynb](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/eaton-lab/phylogenetic-data-science/HEAD?filepath=docs%2Fchapter-1%2Fnotebooks%2Fnode-class-1.ipynb)


## Learning objectives
The goal of this chapter is to introduce coding concepts underlying the
tree objects used in computational packages like `toytree`. By gaining a
better understanding of how these objects are designed, they will be easier
to work with. By the end of this chapter you will:

1. Practice development of a custom Python class object.
2. Have an improved understanding of object-oriented programming principles.
3. Understand how Node class objects can represent a Tree data structure.

## Coding practices
This is one of our first in depth coding exercises, so we will start
relatively slowly, describing the steps that are taken and why. This
lesson will use concepts from the bootcamp chapters including [types],
[functions] (including type hints), and [classes]. You can find an
additional review of relevant concepts in the [Python tutorial chapter
on classes].

[types]: ../../bootcamp/0.2-python-types/
[functions]: ../../bootcamp/0.3-python-funcs/
[classes]: ../../bootcamp/0.4-python-classes/
[Python tutorial chapter on classes]: https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/classes.html

## A Node-based Tree
In the last chapter we briefly introduced the concept of a *tree data
structure* as a computational concept that allows for efficient storage
and access to hierarchical data. In this chapter we will elaborate
on this concept by developing a Python class objects as an example
of such a data structure.

A tree is composed of nodes and edges. These could each be represented by
separate objects in memory, for example as Python classes, but it turns
out that the simplest approach is to only represent one or the other, since
they are inherently linked (edges describe relationships among nodes).
Therefore a tree data structure is typically represented *only by Node
objects*.

Node objects can store information about a Node, such as its name (label) and
any other arbitrary data we might want to apply to it. In addition, it can
store *pointers* that reference other Nodes that it is directly connected to.
In this way, the pointers act as edges of the tree structure, but do not
take up space in memory (e.g., we don't need to create a separate table to
store the edge information). This usage of assigning *pointer* attributes to
Node objects is similar to how dictionaries work in Python, where keys act
as pointers to other Python objects that exist in memory. Since Nodes contain
references to each other, an entire tree structure can be stored simply as
a collection of Nodes.

## Node class (simple)
We will walk through several examples of developing Node class objects,
starting with a very simple example, and then iteratively building it into
a more complex class. Here is our first bare-bones starting point.

```py
class Node:
    def __init__(self, name):
        self.name = name
        self.children = ()
        self.up = None
```

Because this is our first class we'll walk through it slowly. This is a
class that takes a single argument to store a `.name` attribute, and also
includes two additional attributes, `.children` and `.up`, which will be
used to store references to other Nodes that are descendant or ancestral
from this Node, respectively. As with any `class`, its definition starts
with an `__init__` function, which is used to create (initialize) instances
of the class. This is where any arguments input by the user, such as `name`
in this case, are stored as attributes, and any other attributes of
the class that we want to create should be defined and set to a starting
value (e.g., children and up). This is done by assigning attributes to the
special keyword `self`, which is a reference to the new instance that is being
created.

Now that we have defined this new class, we can use it to create new
`Node` instances. Let's create an instance and store it as a variable so that
we can use it to explore more about its structure.

```py
node_A = Node(name="A")
print(node_A)
```
```py
# <__main__.Node at 0x7fa22228e790>
```
The printed output of our Node will look like below, which is simply the
default representation for a custom class which shows the object type and
location where it is defined (`__main__.Node`) and
some random-looking information (`at 0x...`) that represents its place in
memory (i.e., a hash table). We will see in a little bit how we can
customize this to be a bit more informative and pretty.



## Class Style
Following our style guide a more complete example of this class would look
like below, which includes a detailed sphinx-compatible docstring, type
hints, and comments in the code. For the sake of brevity we will not write
all of the docstrings in as verbose of way throughout this chapter, but do
so here to provide an example of good coding practices. From this example
we can see more clearly what object types will be used to fill the different
attributes of the Node class, and how to use it.

```py
from typing import Tuple, Optional

class Node:
    """A single Node that connects to other Nodes to create a tree structure.

    Parameters
    ----------
    name: str
        A string label applied to this Node.

    Attributes
    ----------
    children: Tuple of Nodes
        An ordered tuple of Nodes directly descended (children) of this Node.
    up: Node or None
        The parent (ancestor) of this Node

    Examples
    --------
    >>> node_a = Node(name="A")
    >>> node_b = Node(name="B")
    >>> node_a.children = (node_b,)
    >>> node_b.up = node_a
    """
    def __init__(self, name: str):
        self.name = name

        # attributes to be updated after init to form connections.
        self.children: Tuple['Node'] = ()
        self.up: Optional['Node'] = None
```

## Connecting Nodes
Our class is very simple at this point, and so not yet very useful.
But already we can begin to create a tree data structure simply by forming
connections among multiple Node instances. Below we create three Node
instances with different names, and then update the `.children` and `.up`
attributes to create references (pointers) from one to another, such that
the node named "A" is parent to Nodes "B" and "C".

```py
# create several Node instances
node_a = Node(name="A")
node_b = Node(name="B")
node_c = Node(name="C")

# connect them by setting their children and/or up attributes
node_a.children = (node_b, node_c)
node_b.up = node_a
node_c.up = node_a
```

That's it, we have created a tree structure. By visiting each Node we could
now extract a complete edge table. As an example, the code below will visit
each Node using a for-loop to print the edge information extracted from each
Node's `.up` and `.children` attributes, by referencing each Node by its
`.name` attribute. This tree contains two edges, which we can find in multiple
ways:

```py
# e.g., get edge information from Nodes .children attributes
for node in (node_a, node_b, node_c):
    for child in node.children:
        print(node.name, "-->", child.name)
```

```py
# e.g., get edge information from Nodes .up attributes
for node in (node_a, node_b, node_c):
    if node.up:
        print(node.up.name, "-->", node.name)
```

Both methods will print the following:
```py
# A --> B
# A --> C
```

## Object-oriented programming
The development of a custom class object for creating a tree structure is
an example of *object-oriented* programming (OOP). This is a design principle
in programming that can be used to organize code to make it easier to read
and understand for programmers, and also easier to use and learn for users.
A key concept of OOP is the creation of *class methods*, which are functions
that are inherently attached to a class object. Let's start by creating an
example, in the form of a function that can be used to form connections among
Nodes similar to what we did in the example above. We will call this function
`add_child()`.

```py
class Node:
    """A Node instance that includes a method as an example."""
    def __init__(self, name: str):
        self.name = name
        self.children: Tuple["Node"] = ()
        self.up: Optional["Node"] = None

    def add_child(self, name: str) -> None:
        """Creates a new Node and connects it as a child to this Node."""
        new_node = Node(name=name)
        new_node.up = self
        self.children += (new_node, )
```

The new version of our Node class above now includes a method which can be
used to create a new Node and attach it to the existing Node that calls this
function. As you can see, the first argument to the `add_child` method is
`self`, this is because the method includes references to `self`, and so it
must accept `self` as an argument. It is typical that almost all methods of a
class will start with `self` as the first argument. In addition, our function
takes another argument for the name that it will give to the new Node that
will be created. Finally, note that the `def` line ends with a `->` pointing
to the *type* that is expected to be returned. This is a type hint. It does
not affect how the code functions, but simply indicates to the developer and
user what to expect to happen when the function is run. In this case, it
doesn't return anything (i.e., it returns None). Below is an example of how
we can use this new code to create the same tree structure that we did above.

```py
node_a = Node("A")
node_a.add_child("B")
node_a.add_child("C")
```

This provides a much simpler and more understandable workflow than in the
first example. We can use tab-completion in an interactive environment, like
a jupyter notebook, to see the attributes and methods available from a Node
instance, and we would see that `add_child` is an option of this class. In
this way, the design of the class itself makes it easy for us to understand
what it is possible to do using it. This is a strength of OOP: organizing
functions that operate on classes to be associated with the class objects
themselves. By contrast, if there was just a function in the global namespace
called `add_child` we might not be aware of it, or know what type of objects
it is intended to be used on.


## Node class (advanced)
Now that we have introduced the `__init__` function, and additional custom
functions of a class, let's start to adding several additional details to
the class. Here I added:

1. An additional argument to the `__init__`
that allows for setting a `.dist` attribute, which will be used to represent
the length of the edge from this Node to its parent. In addition, I set
default values for both `name` and `dist` in the `__init__` to "" and 0,
respectively. These same arguments and default were also added to the
`add_child` method.

2. Two additional functions called `is_leaf()`
and `is_root()` that return a boolean indicating the type of Node that
each is based on information about its *degree* (number of in_degree or
out_degree connections). For example, if a node has no in_degree edges then
it must be the root. If it has no out_degree edges then it must be a leaf.

3. A custom *dunder* method called `__repr__`. Class functions that are
surrounded by double underscores represent a special type of function called
a dunder. These do not appear when using auto-complete in a jupyter notebook
unless you type the underscores manually. They are *intended* to be private
functions that the user does not need to see, unless they go searching for it.
It turns out that all classes have several dunders that are automatically
created by default. The `__repr__` is an example. This is the representation
of what will be shown when the object is returned (e.g., when it appears in
the output cell of a Jupyter notebook). There is a related function called
`__str__` that can be used to separately format what it will look like when
called in a print function. Here we overwrite the existing default `__repr__`
function to make our Node objects a bit easier to understand, so that they
will simply show a Node as `'Node(name)'` instead of `__main__.Node at 0x....`
when we view them.

4. I modified the `add_child` function to now *return* the new Node object
that it creates so that we can store it as a variable if we want to. This
makes it easier in the example code below to iterate over each Node that has
been created, since we have not yet created functions to traverse the tree,
which we will begin to do in the next chapter. You'll notice that the type
hint now shows that it returns a "Node".

```py
class Node:
    """A Node instance that can connect with other Nodes to form a Tree.

    Parameters
    ----------
    name: str
        A name string associated with a Node when printed or visualized.
    dist: float
        A float value as the distance between this Node and its parent (up)

    Attributes
    ----------
    children: Tuple
        A tuple of Node instances that are descended from this Node.
    up: Node or None
        A Node that is ancestral to this Node, or None if this Node is root.
    """
    def __init__(self, name: str="", dist: float=0.):
        self.name = str(name)
        self.dist = float(dist)
        self.children: Tuple['Node'] = ()
        self.up: Optional['Node'] = None

    def __repr__(self) -> str:
        """Return string representation as Node(name)."""
        return f"Node({self.name})"

    def is_leaf(self) -> bool:
        """Return True if Node is a leaf (i.e., has no children)."""
        return not bool(self.children)

    def is_root(self) -> bool:
        """Return True if Node is the root (i.e., has no ancestor)."""
        return bool(self.up is None)

    def add_child(self, name: str="", dist: float=0.) -> "Node":
        """Add a Node as a child to this one."""
        new_node = Node(name=name, dist=dist)
        new_node.up = self
        self.children += (new_node,)
        return new_node
```

Let's try out the new Node class by making several Nodes with different
edge lengths to their parents, and print several types of information about
each of them.

```py
# create three connected Nodes
node_a = Node("A", dist=0)
node_b = node_a.add_child("B", dist=1)
node_c = node_a.add_child("C", dist=2)

# iteratate over Nodes and print information
for node in (node_a, node_b, node_c):
    print(node, node.name, node.dist, node.is_leaf(), node.is_root(), node.children)
```

This returns the following below. The first thing to notice here is the first
and last element in each row, which lists the Node object and its children.
You can see Node objects are now being represented by the `Node(name)`
representation that we set using the `__repr__` method of our class. Next you
can see that each Node has a name and dist value corresponding to the values
that were set in our code. Finally, the functions `is_leaf` and `is_root`
return different boolean answers for the two different Node types that we
created, a root Node (A) and two leaf Nodes (B and C).

```py
# Node(A) A 0.0 False True (Node(B), Node(C))
# Node(B) B 1.0 True False ()
# Node(C) C 2.0 True False ()
```

Already we can see that with very little coding we are creating a class
object that can be used to extract a lot of information about individual
parts of a tree. As the tree gets bigger, however, it will become more
difficult to keep track of the collection of many Node objects. A convenient
solution to this is to use `traversal` algorithms, which will allow one
to easily move up or down the tree from any given point, or to traverse
every connected Node in a tree in an expected order. In the next
chapter we will develop traversal functions.

## Class Inheritance
Before moving on, since we are discussing object-oriented programming
in this chapter, it is worth mentioning one more useful principle of OOP
which is *class inheritance*. This is another coding principle that does
not actually affect the performance of your code, but is rather a design
principle used by developers to make their code easier to read and debug.
It is a way to take a simple class definition, like the ones we created
above, and to create variants of these classes that are similar (because
they *inherit* any properties of their parent class), but can differ in
any ways that are defined in the new class.

As an example, let's create a new class that is a constrained version of
our previous class: one where you can only connect at most two children
to any Node (i.e., it enforces that the tree must be *bifurcating*). We
can create this very simply by inheriting from our previous class, and then
adding some kind of check that will raise an exception is the user tries
to add >2 children to a Node. This is done below by creating a new class
that we will call `BiNode` that uses the parent class (`Node`) inside
parentheses to indicate it is inherting from this. We then overwrite
the `add_child` function to include an if-statement that raises an
exception if adding a child would create a polytomy, and also to make
this function create and return BiNode objects instead of Nodes. We also
overwrite the `__repr__` func to show BiNode instead of Node. But, as you
can see, we do not need to write the other functions such as `is_leaf` or
`is_root` again. Since we did not overwrite them, they are inherited from
Node and act is the exact same way they would in that class.

```py
class BiNode(Node):
    """A subclass of Node that cannot add >2 children to a BiNode."""

    def __repr__(self):
        """Return string representation of this class instance"""
        return f"BiNode({self.name})"

    def add_child(self, name: str, dist: float=0.) -> 'BiNode':
        """Creates a new BiNode and connects it as a child to this BiNode."""
        # raise an exception if the BiNode already has 2 children.
        if len(self.children) >= 2:
            raise ValueError("Cannot add >2 children to a BiNode.")
        # else, create and connect the new BiNode
        new_node = BiNode(name=name, dist=dist)
        new_node.up = self
        self.children += (new_node, )
        return new_node
```

We can now create a tree of connected BiNodes just as we did with Nodes, and
print information about them as we did before to get the same kind of result.
The main difference arises when we try to add third child to BiNode(A) which
will raise a ValueError, as we instructed as a constraint in our new class.

```py
# create three connected BiNodes
node_a = BiNode("A", dist=0)
node_b = node_a.add_child("B", dist=1)
node_c = node_a.add_child("C", dist=2)

# iteratate over BiNodes and print information
for node in (node_a, node_b, node_c):
    print(node, node.name, node.dist, node.is_leaf(), node.is_root(), node.children)
```

This is expected to raise an exception due to the new class's constraints:
```py
node_a.add_child("D")
```
```py
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ValueError                                Traceback (most recent call last)
Input In [268], in <module>
----> 1 node_a.add_child("D")

Input In [266], in BiNode.add_child(self, name, dist)
      9 # raise an exception if the BiNode already has 2 children.
     10 if len(self.children) >= 2:
---> 11     raise ValueError("Cannot add >2 children to a BiNode.")
     12 # else, create and connect the new BiNode
     13 new_node = BiNode(name=name, dist=dist)

ValueError: Cannot add >2 children to a BiNode.
```

## Summary

In summary, classes are ...