
# The toytree classes

The last lesson demonstrated how to develop a simple tree structure by 
connecting multiple Node class objects. In this chapter we will focus on the
development of a class object that is closer in design to what is used in 
the `toytree` package. This will help to illuminate how to use `toytree`
more effectively, while also demonstrating some coding practices that can 
be useful in many other contexts.

## Learning objectives
- learn `toytree.Node` and `toytree.ToyTree` classes.
- learn about designing Classes using the Python `@property` decorator 
and private attributes.
- learn about caching and speed

## Python loves cached data
Traversals are relatively fast, however, for some types of analyses 
there are advantages to storing cached (saved to hash table) information that
can be retrieved without requiring traversal of the tree. This is 
expecially useful if the tree is very large and you want to extract data 
from only a single node. One example of this is Node heights. Calculating
heights seems simple, it is just the sum of edge lengths from the root Node,
right? Well, in an **ultrametric tree** that would be true, however, not 
all trees are ultrametric. If tips are different distances from the root, 
then the height of a Node may need to be calculated relative to some other 
connected Node that is farthest from the root. This requires calculating the
distance of every tip from the root, and then asking how far above some 
other tip your focal tip is located. Not too complicated, but the ability 
to do this quickly can speed up many operations. 

Remember from the [Coding Bootcamp] that we can measure the speed of 
executed code easily using the IPython magic command `%timeit`
```python
tree = toytree.rtree.unittree(ntips=10, seed=123)

def get_ntips_example1(tree: toytree.ToyTree) -> int:
	"""Return leaf Nodes by traversing tree."""
	return sum(1 if i.is_leaf() for i in tree.traverse())

def get_ntips_example2(tree: toytree.ToyTree) -> int:
	"""Return leaf Nodes from cache."""
	return tree.ntips
```

```python
%%timeit


```

### *Private attributes*
These are termed private or hidden because they are
not intended to be accessed by a user. The single underscore at the beginning
of their name indicates this; stay away. It is further exemplified within
interactive environments, like a jupyter notebook, where using tab-completion
to view attributes and functions associated with an object *will not show
private attributes and functions* by default, unless you begin to type the
underscore. 

Why create private attributes and functions? There are actually several good 
reasons: (1) to only show users the code that they are intended to use; 
(2) to limit or specify how a user can modify an object; and (3) to limit 

to use. This can require a lot of careful work by the developers, and is
often overlooked, but has a huge impact on making a package easy to learn and
use. 


### toytree.Node first look

Let's start by creating an example Node object that uses the `@property`
decorator, and which only defines private attribute names in the `__init__`.
Remember that all attributes of a class should be defined in the `__init__`
function. So how will a user access data for this Node is all of its 
attributes are private? The answer is to use properties, which is easiest to
do using the `@property` decorator. 

The user will now be able to see `NodeExample1.name`, which looks like an 
attribute, but is actually a property. It will return the `_name` attribute
when called, and will call the associated *setter* function if the user tries
to assign a new value to the property. This latter usage is perhaps the most
important. It provides an opportunity to intercept the value that the user
wants to assign to the property and to check it for various requirements 
before assigning it to the associated private attribute. For example, if 
a user tried to call `node.name = 3` the setter function here intercepts the
input value and converts it to a string by using the `str()` function before
assigning it to the `node._name` attribute.

```py

class Node1:
	"""A simplified version of toytree.Node used here for demonstration."""
	def __init__(self, name: str=""):
		self._name = name

		# non-init attributes for storing connections among Nodes	
		self.up: Node = None
		self.children: Tuple['Node1'] = ()

	@property
	def name(self) -> str:
		return self._name

	@name.setter
	def name(self, value: str) -> None:
		self._name = str(value)
```

So we now have an improved method for setting the name of a Node, which will
ensure that the value is always a string. What else can we use properties for?
In `toytree` we use this framework to purposefully make Node objects immutable,
meaning that do not want users to edit the attributes of Node's directly, 
for example by editing which Node is the parent of another. An example of this
would be the following:
```py
node1 = Node1('1')
node2 = Node1('2')
node3 = Node1('3')
node1.children = [node2, node3]
```

The above operation is allowed using the simple Node class that we developed 
in the previous lesson. However, this is not a good operation, since the 
references among the objects is not complete. node1 has a reference to its 
two child Nodes, however, the child nodes do did not set node1 as their 
parent (`._up` attribute). One way to restrict users from making this error
is to *only allow* them to modify .children or .up using functions that are
designed to ensure that they are set appropriately. 

```py

class Node2:
	"""A simplified version of toytree.Node used here for demonstration."""
	def __init__(self, name: str=""):
		self._name = name

		# non-init attributes for storing connections among Nodes
		self._children: Tuple[Node] = ()
		self._up: Optional[Node] = None

	@property
	def name(self) -> str:
		return self._name

	@name.setter
	def name(self, value: str) -> None:
		self._name = str(value)

	@property
	def children(self) -> Tuple[Node]:
		return self._children

	@children.setter
	def children(self, value: Tuple[Node]) -> None:
		raise TypeError("'children' attribute does not allow item assignment")

	@property
	def up(self) -> Node:
		return self._up

	@up.setter
	def up(self, value: Tuple[Node]) -> None:
		raise TypeError("'up' attribute does not allow item assignment")

	def add_child(self, node: Node) -> None:
		"""Add a Node as a connected child to this Node."""
		node._up = self
		self._children += (node, )
```

Now to assign a child the user *must* use the `add_child` function, which
ensures that when a child is added the connections are made from both parent
to child, and child to parent. If the user has an advanced understanding of 
the Node2 class they can of course work around this solution by modifying the
hidden `._up` and `_children` attributes, but in that case they know that they
are editing attributes that were purposefully not exposed to the user, and so
should not be surprised if they potentially encounter unexpected outcomes.

### Private functions
We may similarly wish to develop private functions. This is useful for 
functions that are for internal use by the developer, but are unlikely to 
be useful to users. By hiding them from the user it will present a more 
user-friendly object that directs them to use it in the best way possible.

### An immutable Node class
Have a look at the `toytree.Node` class object from the current `main` branch
of `toytree` on GitHub. You can see that it follows the principle we can 
developed above but with a few additional private attributes. Most 
importantly, this includes the `.height` attribute of a Node. 

### Unique node labels (idx)
A set of connected Nodes can only be accessed by their traversal currently,
or by data assigned to nodes, such as name attributes. We have learned how to 
use properties to limit how users assign values to a single object, but what
if we want to assign data to a Node that takes into account the data of all
other connected Nodes? An example would be assigning a unique number to 
every Node to serve as a label. ...


### The ToyTree class object
As we've discussed previously, a tree-like structure can be represented 
simply by the connections among Node objects, so what use is there in 
creating a separate Tree class object? In `toytree` this was design choice
was made because we decided there was a distinction in the intended way that
a Tree versus Node object is intended to be used. A Node stores data including
information about its direct edges, whereas a Tree stores information 
about a set of connected Nodes, and has functions meant for operating on 
them as a collection. With this in mind, we created a class object 
called `ToyTree` that is initialized with a `Node` object that represents
the root Node of a tree (whether or not the tree is rooted).

```py
# design expectation
tree = ToyTree(root_node)

# access information about all Nodes connected to root_node
print(tree.nnodes)
print(tree.ntips)
print(tree.get_node_data("height"))

# traverse Nodes in desired order


# edit Node attributes (returns a new tree with modified Node dists)
tree = tree.set_node_data("height", mapping={0: 100, 1: 200})

```